> [!info] Rules
> [[3.1. Earning Points]]

> **Jammers score one point every time they lap an opposing Blocker.**

### Scenario C3.1.A

Red Jammer approaches the Pack for their second trip. Red Jammer passes all opponents except a White Non-Pivot Blocker, who blocks Red Jammer out, forcing Red Jammer to re-enter behind the Pack. Before Red Jammer reenters the Pack, White Jammer passes the Star to White Pivot. Red Jammer reenters the Pack, passes all opponents again, and exits the Engagement Zone.

**Points:** Four points.

**Rationale:** As a result of the successful Star Pass, the White Jammer and White Pivot exchange status in terms of scoring and being scored upon. Since the Red Jammer had already scored on the original White Pivot before the Star Pass, they have the point for the White Blocker (originally the White Jammer) in this trip and cannot score it again.

**Keep in Mind:** Were it White Pivot who blocked Red Jammer out, and White Pivot received a Star Pass and exited the Engagement Zone before being passed, Red Jammer could still score four points by earning a pass on the former White Jammer (now a Blocker).

### Scenario C3.1.B

Red Jammer enters the Pack ahead of White Jammer, while White Jammer is approaching the Pack for their second trip. Red Jammer passes the Star, and the new Red Jammer escapes the Pack. White Jammer enters the Pack and passes all four Red Blockers (including the original Red Jammer).

**Points:** White Jammer scores four points.

**Rationale:** All Blockers are considered to be tied together with respect to the opposing Jammer’s trip through the Pack. Even though White Jammer did not lap the original Red Jammer, when Red Jammer became a Blocker, this gave White Jammer lapping position.

### Scenario C3.1.C

_Intentionally Removed_

### Scenario C3.1.D

White Jammer is on their second trip through the Pack and jumps the apex, passing all four Red Blockers while mid-air. White Jammer’s right skate lands in bounds, with their hips ahead of all Blockers. As a result of the same action, White Jammer’s left skate subsequently lands out of bounds.

**Points:** Four points.

**Rationale:** White Jammer’s in-bounds status was maintained while airborne because the first part of their skate to touch back down touched in bounds. White Jammer’s upright status was maintained while airborne because they touched the floor skate first. The fact that White Jammer touched out of bounds with the other skate does not affect points (but does affect their subsequent position relative to the Skaters they passed while airborne).