> [!info] Rules
> [[3.2. Scoring Trips]]

> **Points are grouped by trips through the Pack.**

### Scenario C3.2.A

_Intentionally Removed_

### Scenario C3.2.B

White Pivot is sent to the Penalty Box shortly after the Jam begins. Red Jammer completes their first trip through the Pack, and begins their second. Red Jammer earns a pass on two White Blockers before White Pivot returns to the track and the Jam is called.

**Points:** Three points.

**Rationale:** On Red Jammer’s second trip through the Pack, they earned a pass on White Pivot by earning a pass on the first White Blocker while White Pivot was penalized.

### Scenario C3.2.C

At the start of the Jam, Red Jammer blocks White Jammer out of bounds and skates clockwise. Red Jammer leaves the Engagement Zone from the rear, reenters it from the front, and skates in bounds to the rear of the Pack. White Jammer comes in behind Red Jammer, and gets stuck in the Pack prior to restarting their initial trip through the Pack. Red Jammer skates forward, exits the Engagement Zone from the front, enters the Engagement Zone from the rear, earns passes on all opponents, and completes their initial trip through the Pack.

**Points:** Zero points.

**Rationale:** Even though Red Jammer earned passes while “lapping” all opposing Blockers on their initial trip through the Pack, passes prior to the initial trip do not count toward lapping Blockers.

### Scenario C3.2.D

White Blocker begins the Jam in the Penalty Box. Red Jammer finishes their first trip through the Pack and begins their second. White Blocker returns to the track behind Red Jammer. Red Jammer earns passes on all opponents and exits the front of the Engagement Zone.

**Points:** Four points.

**Rationale:** Because White Blocker returned to the track behind Red Jammer, Red Jammer could still earn a pass on them by earning a pass on another White Blocker.

**Keep in Mind:** If White Blocker had passed Red Jammer before Red Jammer earned a pass on another opposing Blocker, Red Jammer would have to earn a pass on the returning White Blocker to score their point as usual.

### Scenario C3.2.E

_Intentionally Removed_