> [!info] Rules
> [[3.3. Scoring Avoidance]]

> **Opponents can only avoid being scored upon by remaining ahead of the Jammer, or by ensuring that when they are passed, the pass is not earned.**

### Scenario C3.3.A

White Jammer is on their second trip through the Pack and earns a pass on all opposing Blockers except Red Pivot, who is in front of them. White Jammer exits the front of the Engagement Zone with Red Pivot still in front of them.

**Points:** Four points.

**Rationale:** Leaving the Engagement Zone ahead of the opposing Jammer is not a valid means for a Blocker such as Red Pivot to avoid being scored upon. Via this action, they denied White Jammer the opportunity to earn a pass on them during their second trip through the Pack. Thus, White Jammer is considered to have earned a pass on Red Pivot upon completing their second trip through the Pack. The other opposing Blockers had already been scored upon as usual.

**Keep in Mind:** Had the Jam ended before White Jammer exited the Engagement Zone but while Red Pivot was ahead of them and also ahead of the Engagement Zone, White Jammer would have earned the pass on Red Pivot for the same reason because the Jam ending completes the scoring trip. However, had Red Pivot remained inside the Engagement Zone but ahead of White Jammer, White Jammer would not have earned a pass on Red Pivot because they had the opportunity to do so while inside the Engagement Zone.

### Scenario C3.3.B

White Jammer is on their second trip through the Pack. They earn a pass on all opposing Blockers except Red Pivot, who is in front of them. Red Pivot forces White Jammer out of bounds, and then goes out of play. Red Pivot turns around, returns to play, and ends up behind White Jammer who is still out of bounds. White Jammer reenters in front of Red Pivot, and just ahead of the Engagement Zone.

**Points:** Three points.

**Rationale:** When White Jammer reentered the track outside the Engagement Zone, their second trip through the Pack was complete. At that time, Red Pivot was in play. As such, White Jammer had the opportunity to earn a pass on Red Pivot during that trip through the Pack by returning to play inside the Engagement Zone, and then passing the Red Pivot.

### Scenario C3.3.C

White Jammer begins their second trip through the Pack. Red Blocker 1 is sent to the Penalty Box. Red Blocker 2 removes themself from play to address an equipment issue. White Jammer has not passed Red Blockers 3 or 4. The Jam is then called off.

**Points:** Zero points.

**Rationale:** White Jammer did not earn a pass on any opponents before the Jam ended.

**Keep in Mind:** White Jammer had the opportunity to earn a pass on Red Blockers 3 or 4, and would have thereby earned a pass on Red Blocker 1 and Red Blocker 2 for a total of three points.

### Scenario C3.3.D

White Jammer begins their second trip through the Pack. Red Blockers 1 and 2 are already seated in the Penalty Box. Red Blocker 3 goes to the Box for a penalty. Red Blocker 4 removes themself from play to address an equipment issue. White Jammer skates past their own teammates.

**Points:** Four points.

**Rationale:** Because there was no opportunity for White Jammer to earn a pass on any of their opponents, White Jammer earns a pass on all of them by completing the trip through the Engagement Zone as defined during a No Pack situation.

### Scenario C3.3.E

White Jammer begins their second trip through the Pack. Red Blockers 1 and 2 are already seated in the Penalty Box. Red Blocker 3 loses a toe stop and removes themself from active play. Red Blocker 4 is issued a penalty and is told to remain on the track, but skates off anyway. White Jammer skates past their teammates and Red Blocker 4 while the Officials tell Red Blocker 4 to return to the track.

**Points:** Four points.

**Rationale:** Because Red Blocker 4 was not sent off the track to the Box, that Blocker is still part of active gameplay (just out of bounds). When White Jammer skated past Red Blocker 4, the pass was earned as usual even though Red Blocker 4 was out of bounds at the time.

**Keep in Mind:** If Red Blocker 4 had taken off quickly so that White Jammer was denied the opportunity to earn a pass on Red Blocker 4, then when White Jammer completed their trip through the Engagement Zone, they would have earned the pass on Red Blocker 4 just as though Red Blocker 4 were ahead of the Engagement Zone (but still in bounds). Because there is no Pack, White Jammer’s trip through the Engagement Zone is completed when they are 20 ft (6.10 m) in front of the foremost in-bounds member of the prior Pack (in this case, their teammate).

### Scenario C3.3.F

Red Jammer commits a penalty at the beginning of their second trip through the Pack, not having earned any passes on opponents during that trip. While Red Jammer is in the Penalty Box, two White Blockers are sent to the Box. Red Jammer is released and returns to the Engagement Zone. The Pack is moving fast, and Red Jammer does not pass anybody. The other two White Blockers are released and return to the track behind Red Jammer. The Jam ends.

**Points:** Zero points.

**Rationale:** Red Jammer had an opportunity to earn a pass on the two penalized White Blockers by earning a pass on one of the unpenalized White Blockers.

### Scenario C3.3.G

_Intentionally Removed_

### Scenario C3.3.H

_Intentionally Removed_

### Scenario C3.3.I

Red Jammer completes their first trip through the Pack and has passed one opposing Blocker when they remove the Star. While the Star is off, the three other opposing Blockers commit penalties and are sent to the Penalty Box. The Jam ends while Red Jammer’s Star is still in their hand.

**Outcome:** One point.

**Rationale:** Red Jammer was not able to earn points while the Star was off, but they still receive the point earned while the Star was on.

**Keep in Mind:** If Red Jammer had put the Star back on before the end of the Jam, they would have earned points for the other opposing Blockers as soon as the Star was back on their helmet.

### Scenario C3.3.J

Red Jammer begins a scoring trip and is ahead of White Jammer. Red Jammer earns passes on three White Blockers but remains behind White Pivot. White Jammer successfully passes the Star to White Pivot, but remains behind Red Jammer. Red Jammer completes their scoring trip having never earned a pass on the original White Jammer (now Blocker).

**Outcome:** Four points.

**Rationale:** Red Jammer must have at least one opportunity to earn a pass on all opposing Blockers on every trip through the Pack, including a Jammer-turned-Blocker as a result of a Star Pass. When the Jammer becomes a Blocker, they are considered a Blocker returning to active gameplay (see [[2.5. Passing|Section 2.5]]).