> [!info] Casebook
> [[5.4. Assessing Penalties Casebook]]

**All Referees may assess penalties to Skaters for illegal actions that have impact on the game.** Non-Skating Officials may assess penalties that are relevant to their position in the game, unless prohibited from doing so by the Head Referee. Officials will use their judgment under the guidelines set forth in the Rules of Flat Track Roller Derby Casebook. They must do so as soon as possible and at a volume sufficient to be heard by the penalized Skater and relevant Officials given the constraints of the venue. Until this has occurred, nobody is required to behave as if the Skater has been penalized.

**No penalty should be assessed unless the Official is certain that the penalty is warranted.** If Officials cannot agree on whether an action warrants a penalty, the Head Referee’s decision is final.

If the only Blocker from a team who is on the track commits a penalty, the Blocker should not be sent off the track until another Blocker from their team rejoins the Pack.

If a penalty is warranted, but it is not clear to whom the penalty should be assessed, an Official should assess the penalty to the nearest Blocker from the appropriate team if the action is committed mid-Jam, or to the team’s Captain if the action is committed between Jams. If an Official is not certain which team is responsible, no penalty should be assessed. If off-skates Team Staff commit a penalty, the penalty should be assessed to the appropriate team’s Captain. If a penalty is assessed to the Captain due to the fact that they are Captain, they will serve the penalty as a Blocker in a following Jam.