> [!info] Casebook
> [[4. Penalties Casebook]]

- [[4.1. Contact Penalties]]
	- [[4.1.1. Impact to an Illegal Target Zone]]
	- [[4.1.2. Impact with an Illegal Blocking Zone]]
	- [[4.1.3. Other Illegal Contact]]
	- [[4.1.4. Multiplayer Blocks]]
- [[4.2. Game Structure Penalties]]
	- [[4.2.1. Illegal Positioning]]
	- [[4.2.2. Gaining Position]]
	- [[4.2.3. Interfering with the Flow of the Game]]
	- [[4.2.4. Other Illegal Procedures]]
- [[4.3. Penalties for Unsporting Conduct (Misconduct)]]
- [[4.4. Enforcing Penalties]]
	- [[4.4.1. Penalty Enforcement for Blockers]]
	- [[4.4.2. Penalty Enforcement for Jammers]]
- [[4.5. Fouling Out and Expulsions]]

**When a Skater commits a rule infraction or a foul, a penalty may be assessed as a punishment, handicap, or loss of advantage.** Penalties are applied to both a Skater and the position that Skater is currently playing.

Officials signal and enforce penalties and warnings as they occur during a game. Penalties should not be assessed for actions that have little to no impact on the game or the Skaters.

The following types of penalties are addressed in detail in the sections listed below and in the Rules of Flat Track Roller Derby Casebook. These sections hold specific examples that are to be followed explicitly.

Illegal actions that do not fall cleanly into one of the categories below should be penalized using these descriptions and examples as guidelines.

If one Skater’s illegal action causes an opponent to unavoidably commit another illegal action, the opponent will not receive a penalty for the unavoidable illegal action. The initial Skater should be penalized if the initial illegal action has sufficient impact on the game.