> [!info] Casebook
> [[4.2.2. Gaining Position Casebook]]

**It is illegal for a Skater to use the out-of-bounds area to gain position on someone who is upright and in bounds.** This action is referred to as “cutting the track.” Skaters who are out of bounds must return in bounds behind any upright and in-bounds Skater who they were behind when they left the track. The position of downed Skaters is not assessed until they are upright. If there is a Pack, Skaters who are out of bounds may return in bounds in front of any out-of-play Skaters. If there is no Pack, Skaters who are out of bounds may return in bounds in front of any Skaters more than 20 ft (6.10 m) from the last defined Pack.

Skaters who intentionally, but legally, leave the track (examples include to report to the Penalty Box or to fix equipment) must return to the track behind all in-play Blockers. If there is no Pack, they must return to the track behind all Blockers within 20 ft (6.10 m) of the last defined Pack. Skaters returning to the track from the Penalty Box must do so without illegally gaining position.

**If a Skater is put out of bounds due to an opponent’s block, the Skater must return in bounds behind that opponent, even if the Skater was in front of the opponent before being blocked.** That opponent gives up this advantage if they go down, out of bounds, or out of play (or more than 20 ft \[6.10 m] from the last defined Pack if there is no Pack) prior to the Skater reentering the track. Skaters other than the initiator of the block are able to reestablish their superior position if they are upright, in bounds, and in play before the Skater returns to the track. Skaters who illegally reenter the track may immediately cede by returning fully out of bounds. Cutting one single teammate does not have enough impact to warrant a penalty.