> [!info] Casebook
> [[4.5. Fouling Out and Expulsions Casebook]]

**When seven penalties are recorded for a Skater, that Skater fouls out of the game.** This includes penalties assessed to a Skater on behalf of someone else (examples include penalties assessed to a Captain or a Blocker on behalf of their team).

**Expulsions are a way to penalize a Skater or Team Staff who has committed an act that is sufficiently dangerous or unsporting as to remove the individual from the game for that action alone.** Negligent, intentional, or reckless actions should be considered for expulsion independently of their impact. A substitute must serve the penalty for an expelled Skater. If a Non-Skater is expelled, the team’s Captain will serve the penalty when possible (as a Blocker), but no penalty will be recorded for the Captain.

In the event that a Skater is to be removed from play (either due to fouling out or expulsion), that Skater’s penalty time should begin as soon as possible. Timing for a fouled-out Skater begins when either the Skater (or an appropriate substitute between Jams) is seated in the Penalty Box, or after the foul out is confirmed between Officials during the Jam.

If a Skater is removed from the game mid-Jam, their penalty will be timed as if a Skater were seated even though there is no Skater formally in the Box. If the Jam ends before the time is complete, the Skater’s team must be given the opportunity to substitute a different Skater to serve the remainder of the penalty in the same position as the removed Skater. Substitutions may not occur during the Jam in which the Skater is removed.

The Head Referee is the only Official with the authority to expel a Skater, manager, coach, or similar Team Staff. Other Officials may recommend expulsions to the Head Referee.