> [!info] Casebook
> [[2.2.4. Passing the Star Casebook]]

**A team’s Jammer may transfer their position to their team’s Pivot by successfully completing a legal Star Pass. A legal Star Pass requires the Jammer to hand the Star to their team’s Pivot while both Skaters are upright, in bounds, and in play; and while neither Skater is en route to, or in queue for, the Penalty Box.** Upon releasing the Star into the Pivot’s grasp, the position of Jammer is transferred to the Pivot. The new Jammer takes over for the previous Jammer in terms of points scored, trips through the Pack, and Skaters passed. The previous Jammer becomes a Non-Pivot Blocker.

If the Star is passed illegally, both Skaters retain their existing positions. This includes:

- Releasing the Star into the grasp of a Skater other than their Pivot
- Releasing the Star into the Pivot’s grasp while either of the two Skaters is down, out of bounds, out of play, or en route to the Penalty Box
- Releasing the Star into the Pivot’s grasp while the Pivot is in queue for the Penalty Box (even if the Pivot is not yet en route)
- Releasing the Star into the grasp of a Pivot who is not wearing the Stripe

If the Pivot comes into control of the Star through an unsuccessful Star Pass or any other means (for example, by picking up a Star that has fallen to the floor), they will be warned that they are not the Jammer. Accordingly, the Pivot may not put the Star on their own helmet, but they may hold the Star in their hand, drop it, or return it to the Jammer. Only the Jammer or Pivot may recover or control the Star.

The initiator of an illegal Star Pass (or Star recovery) that impacts the game should be penalized.