> [!info] Casebook
> [[2.2. Positions Casebook]]

- [[2.2.1. Jammers]]
- [[2.2.2. Lead Jammer]]
- [[2.2.3. Pivot Blocker]]
- [[2.2.4. Passing the Star]]
- [[2.2.5. Blockers]]

**For each Jam, a team must field one Jammer, and at most four Blockers.** One of these Blockers may be designated as the Pivot Blocker. Any Skaters who are not completely on the track at the Jam-Starting Whistle may not participate in the Jam, and thus do not count toward these limits. Skaters serving penalties (in, or on their way to, the Penalty Box) are counted toward these limits. Teams must field at least one Blocker who is not serving a penalty. Skaters may not change positions during a Jam, except in the case of a Star Pass (see below).

When a Jam begins, the Jammers must be touching on or behind the Jammer Line. All Blockers must be behind the Pivot Line, ahead of the Jammer Line, and all Non-Pivot Blockers must not be touching the Pivot Line. If either Pivot is positioned touching the Pivot Line at the Jam’s start, all Non-Pivot Blockers must be behind that Pivot’s hips.

Any Skaters who are completely on the track, but partially illegally positioned (for example, a Jammer who is touching past the Jammer Line) are required to yield their position to all other Skaters in the immediate vicinity. Any Skaters who are wholly illegally positioned are immediately penalized. Blockers who are required to yield are not considered for Pack definition until they have done so. Jammers who are required to yield cannot earn passes until they have done so.