> [!info] Casebook
> [[2.3. Engagement Zone and Pack Casebook]]

**The Pack is the largest group of in bounds and upright Blockers in proximity and containing members from both teams.** If no single group of Blockers meets this definition, there is no Pack, even if there are multiple groups of the same size. Proximity is defined as not more than 10 ft (3.05m), as measured from the hips, in front of or behind the nearest Pack Skater. When a Skater is penalized, they are considered to no longer be on the track for the purposes of Pack definition and relative position determinations.

It is the responsibility of all Blockers to maintain a Pack, and intentionally destroying the Pack is illegal. When the Pack is moving counterclockwise, stopped, or has no established speed, clockwise skating which destroys the Pack is illegal. All Blockers from both teams must act to reform a Pack. For Skaters in the rear group, this includes stepping or skating in the counterclockwise direction. For Skaters in the front group, this includes coasting, braking, or coming to a complete stop. If an immediate action is not sufficient to reform the Pack, additional effort is required. If a Blocker is in the rear group, they must accelerate (until sprinting) toward the front group until a Pack is reformed (coasting, stepping slowly, or stepping in an only somewhat-counterclockwise direction are insufficient), but they may slow in order to avoid unsafe contact when the Pack reformation is imminent. If a Blocker is in the front group, they must actively brake until they come to a complete stop (coasting is insufficient), but they are not required to skate clockwise.

Blocks on or by Blockers which have impact while there is no Pack should be immediately penalized.

**The Engagement Zone is the area in which it is legal for Blockers to engage or be engaged.** The Engagement Zone extends forward and backward 20 ft (6.10m) from the foremost and rearmost Pack Skaters, respectively. Any Blocker outside of the Engagement Zone is out of play and cannot engage or be engaged. Blockers who are outside of the Engagement Zone will be warned, and will be penalized if they do not immediately attempt to return to the Engagement Zone. Blockers ahead of the Engagement Zone are only compelled to skate clockwise to return to the Engagement Zone if the Pack is stopped or moving clockwise. Skaters who are illegally blocked while out of play may legally counter-block, but may not initiate new blocks or continue blocking beyond what is necessary for safety.

Skaters who are blocked while completely out of bounds may actively absorb the block, but may not continue counter-blocking beyond that, and may not initiate a new block.

Distances for determining the Pack and the Engagement Zone are measured as the shortest distance, parallel to the inside track boundary, between Skaters’ hips.