> [!info] Rules
> [[2.2.1. Jammers]]

> **The Jammer is denoted as the Skater in visible possession of the Jammer helmet cover (a.k.a. “The Star”) at the beginning of the Jam.**

### Scenario C2.2.1.A

Red and White Skaters repeatedly shift positions between Jams, attempting to gain position on one another. As the Jam starts, Red 34 is lined up fully behind the Jammer Line but is not wearing the Star, while Red 27 is lined up fully in front of the Jammer Line and is wearing the Star.

**Outcome:** Red 27 is the Jammer.

**Rationale:** Red 27 is the Skater in possession of the Star. The Star denotes who the Jammer is. Both Skaters should receive a penalty for beginning the Jam fully out of position.

**Keep in Mind:** Once the Jam starts, the Jammer Referee should communicate to Red 27 that they are the Jammer for this Jam. Since the rules do not accommodate for Jammers who forget their helmet covers, starting position should not take precedence over wearing the Star. In this case, both the Jammer (Red 27) and the Blocker (Red 34) have started the Jam in illegal starting positions.

**Keep in Mind:** Assume the following Jammer hierarchy:

|     |                                      |                                                                                            |
| --- | ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| 1   | The Jammer for the upcoming Jam is   | the Jammer from the previous Jam who is in the Penalty Box.                                |
| 2   | If no one satisfies 1, the Jammer is | the Skater who visibly controls the Star who has lined up in the Jammer Starting Position. |
| 3   | If no one satisfies 2, the Jammer is | the Skater who visibly controls the Star but who has lined up out of position.             |
| 4   | If no one satisfies 3,               | there is no Jammer for that team in this Jam, and the Jam should not start.                |

### Scenario C2.2.1.B

Before the Jam-Starting Whistle, Red Jammer skates backward. They come to a quick stop and sprint forward at the Jam-Starting Whistle.

**Outcome:** If Red Jammer was moving clockwise or stopped when the whistle occurred, nothing should be done. If Red Jammer turned counterclockwise earlier and was gaining speed, this should be treated as a false start.

**Rationale:** Jammers may not be gaining speed counterclockwise at the Jam-Starting Whistle.