> [!info] Rules
> [[2.2.2. Lead Jammer]]

> A Jammer becomes ineligible to earn Lead during a Jam if they commit a penalty during that Jam, exit the front of the [[Glossary#Engagement Zone|Engagement Zone]] without having earned Lead, remove their helmet cover, or have their helmet cover removed by a teammate.

### Scenario C2.2.2.A

Red Jammer starts the Jam with their helmet cover inside-out. The stars are not visible with high contrast. They remove the cover, invert it, and put it back on their helmet. They then legally pass all Skaters, including the foremost Blocker.

**Outcome:** Red Jammer is declared Lead.

**Rationale:** Since Red Jammer did not have the ability to gain Lead prior to removing the Star from their head, they did not lose that ability.

**Keep in Mind:** If Red Jammer had removed the Star when the stars were visible, they would have lost the ability to gain Lead.

### Scenario C2.2.2.B

Red Jammer exits the Engagement Zone but does not earn Lead Jammer. White Jammer is knocked down, but not out of bounds. While White Jammer is down, the opposing Blockers—including the foremost Blocker—all skate clockwise behind them. White Jammer then stands back up.

**Outcome:** White Jammer should be declared Lead when they stand.

**Rationale:** By skating clockwise behind White Jammer, the Red Blockers ceded their position. As such, White Jammer earned those passes and they count toward earning Lead.

### Scenario C2.2.2.C

White Jammer makes their way through the Pack on their initial trip, while Red Jammer remains stuck at the rear. Through numerous blocks and changes in position, White Jammer earns a pass on all Blockers, but none of them are ever the foremost Blocker in the Pack when White Jammer earns the pass.

**Outcome:** The Jammer Referee should not declare White Jammer Lead (yet).

**Rationale:** White Jammer has earned a pass against all Blockers, but has never established superior position to the foremost Blocker in the Pack. Lead Jammer is earned when the Jammer has earned a pass on all in-play Blockers and established a superior position to the foremost in-play Blocker.

### Scenario C2.2.2.D

Red Jammer passes all Blockers on their initial trip through the Pack, except for one White Blocker. Red Jammer legally pushes White Blocker to the front of the Engagement Zone, and then out of play.

**Outcome:** Red Jammer is declared Lead as soon as White Blocker leaves the front of the Engagement Zone.

**Rationale:** Red Jammer only needs to pass the in-play Blockers to earn Lead Jammer.

### Scenario C2.2.2.E

White Jammer and Red Jammer are both ahead of all Blockers except White Pivot. Red Jammer is ahead of White Jammer, and pushes White Pivot legally out of the Engagement Zone.

**Outcome:** Red Jammer is declared Lead.

**Rationale:** At the moment that White Pivot left play, both Jammers had passed all in-play Blockers. Because Red Jammer was foremost, Red Jammer was declared Lead.

### Scenario C2.2.2.F

Red Jammer passes all Blockers on their initial trip through the Pack, except White Pivot. Due to unrelated gameplay, Officials declare a No Pack situation. Red Jammer remains behind White Pivot.

**Outcome:** The Jammer Referee should not declare Red Jammer Lead (yet).

**Rationale:** Although White Pivot is now out of play, No Pack situations are different from Out of Play situations regarding earning passes and gaining position to earn Lead Jammer status. During a No Pack situation, a Jammer must still earn passes and may not illegally gain position on Skaters while the Jammer is out of bounds.

**Keep in Mind:** As White Pivot is currently the foremost Blocker, Red Jammer could earn Lead Jammer status by passing White Pivot.

**Keep in Mind:** If the Pack was reformed and White Pivot was ahead of the Engagement Zone, at that point Red Jammer would meet the requirements to earn Lead Jammer status.