> [!info] Rules
> [[4.1.3. Other Illegal Contact]]

> **Initiating a block is legal when a Skater is moving counterclockwise, in play, upright, and in bounds during a Jam using Legal Contact Zones.**

### Scenario C4.1.3.A

White Pivot stands still on their toe stops and initiates a block against Red Jammer. Red Jammer counter-blocks, but is brought to a stop by the White Pivot, who remains stopped.

**Outcome:** White Pivot is penalized.

**Rationale:** If Red Jammer loses position or has their momentum or trajectory severely affected by a block initiated in an illegal way, the initiator should receive a penalty. In this example, if White Pivot had not maintained their stopped position, but had returned to counterclockwise motion while blocking, no penalty would be warranted.

**Keep in Mind:** It is not the use of toe stops that warrants penalization in this scenario, but the fact that the White Pivot had an impact on the Red Jammer while stopped. If White Pivot had continued to move counter-clockwise on the track while on their toe stops, no penalty would have been warranted.

### Scenario C4.1.3.B

Red Blocker uses a Legal Blocking Zone to initiate a block to a Legal Target Zone of White Blocker. White Blocker is pushed until one skate is in bounds and one skate is out of bounds. Red Blocker continues to block until White Blocker is fully out of bounds. Red Blocker re-initiates a new block that knocks White Blocker down.

**Outcome:** Red Blocker is penalized.

**Rationale:** A Skater should not expect to be blocked while out of bounds. It is only legal to block a Skater who is in bounds or straddling. The secondary block is what warrants the penalty.

### Scenario C4.1.3.C

Red Blocker is knocked out of bounds and recycled to the rear of the Pack. They accelerate and move in bounds, directly into White Blocker, who falls.

**Outcome:** Red Blocker is penalized.

**Rationale:** Even if the Target and Blocking Zones were legal and both Skaters were in bounds, Red Blocker gained an unexpected advantage by accelerating while out of bounds into the block. White Blocker should not expect to be blocked by an out-of-bounds opponent.

### Scenario C4.1.3.D

Red Blocker is knocked out of bounds by White Blocker, who also goes out of bounds, leaving an opening on the inside line. The out-of-bounds Red Blocker grabs the in-bounds Red Jammer by the hips and pushes them past the in-bounds White Blockers.

**Outcome:** Red Blocker is penalized.

**Rationale:** The threshold for penalization of assists follows similar metrics to blocks. They cannot come from an unblockable position, such as out of bounds, while down, or while stopped. Because Red Blocker could not legally be blocked, it would also be illegal to provide an assist.

### Scenario C4.1.3.E

White Jammer, having lined up just behind the Jammer Line, is contacted by Red Jammer attempting to take the same space. White Jammer falls out of bounds before the Jam-Starting Whistle.

**Outcome:** Red Jammer is penalized for blocking before the Jam start. White Jammer is allowed to participate in this Jam. Red Jammer has lost the ability to earn Lead Jammer status in this Jam.

**Rationale:** It is illegal to block before a Jam has begun. Because White Jammer was not in a legal starting position due to an opponent’s illegal action, they are allowed to participate in the Jam.

**Keep in Mind:** Should White Jammer be blocked into a false starting position rather than out of bounds, White Jammer is allowed to participate in the Jam (without the need to yield). Red Jammer would still receive a penalty for blocking before the Jam start.

**Keep in Mind:** A Skater penalized before the start of a Jam should serve their penalty in the position in which they appear to be acting.

### Scenario C4.1.3.F

White Blocker initiates contact to Red Jammer during the Jam-Ending Whistle. Red Jammer stumbles significantly off balance after the Jam-Ending Whistle.

**Outcome:** White Blocker initiated legally before the end of the Jam. No penalty.

**Rationale:** It is illegal to block after a Jam has ended. It is, however, legal to initiate during the Jam-Ending Whistle, even if the outcome happens once the Jam has ended.

**Keep in Mind:** Should that same hit start after the Jam-Ending Whistle, Red Jammer need not fall nor be knocked out of bounds. Being hit significantly off balance after the Jam-Ending Whistle is sufficient to penalize the initiator of that hit.

**Keep in Mind:** A Skater penalized after the end of the Jam should serve their penalty in the position in which they appear to be acting.

### Scenario C4.1.3.G

Red Jammer is 18 ft (5.48 m) ahead of the Pack alongside White Pivot. They continue to skate, and an Official gives an Out of Play warning to both players. White Pivot continues to skate alongside Red Jammer, and then blocks Red Jammer, making hip-to-hip contact. Red Jammer counter-blocks White Pivot in an attempt to remain upright and continue on their way. White Pivot falls as a result.

**Outcome:** White Pivot is penalized. Red Jammer is not.

**Rationale:** White Pivot received an Out of Play warning and failed to immediately attempt to return to the Engagement Zone; rather, they continued to block Red Jammer. Skaters who are illegally blocked while out of play may legally counter-block, so Red Jammer’s actions do not warrant a penalty.

**Keep in Mind:** If Red Jammer’s action was not a counter-block, but instead a separate and distinct initiation of a block, Red Jammer should be penalized as White Pivot falling is enough impact to warrant a penalty for illegal contact.

### Scenario C4.1.3.H

Red Jammer is 18 ft (5.48 m) ahead of the pack. White Pivot is alongside Red Jammer. They skate forward, and an Official gives an Out of Play warning to both players. After the warning is given, White Pivot initiates a block to Red Jammer. Red Jammer counter-blocks and is able to maintain their upright status and their momentum. Red Jammer then actively continues blocking White Pivot until White Pivot is Out of Bounds.

**Outcome:** Both players are penalized.

**Rationale:** Both players received an Out of Play warning. White Pivot illegally failed to immediately attempt to return to the engagement zone. Skaters who are illegally blocked while Out of Play may legally counter-block, so Red Jammer’s initial counter-block does not warrant a penalty.

Red Jammer’s continued blocking after absorbing the impact of White Pivot’s block should be considered a new block. While Jammers are never considered Out of Play, blocking an Out of Play skater is illegal for all Skaters. By significantly altering White Pivot’s trajectory, Red Jammer’s illegal block had sufficient impact to warrant a penalty.

**Keep In Mind:** Initiating a block after an Out of Play warning is, by definition, failing to attempt to return to the engagement zone. As such, White Pivot should be penalized for maintaining an illegal position regardless of the impact of their block on the Red Jammer.

### Scenario C4.1.3.I

White Blocker is standing while legally out of bounds. A Red Blocker is blocked off the track and collides with the White Blocker. White Blocker moves toward the Red Blocker and brings up their arms to actively absorb the force of the contact and protect both Skaters. Red Blocker falls to the ground as a result of the contact.

**Outcome:** No penalty.

**Rationale:** While White Blocker moved towards the opposing block, the purpose of the action was to actively absorb the contact, rather than intentionally force the Red Blocker down. The White Blocker’s action was taken in the interest of safety, and should not be penalized. The preservation of player safety supersedes any gameplay concern not already enumerated in the Rules.

### Scenario C4.1.3.J

White Pivot is currently the only white Blocker in the Pack. White Jammer approaches White Pivot and initiates an assist off White Pivot, which abruptly reduces White Pivot’s speed enough to cause them to fall back more than 10 ft. (3 meters).

**Outcome:** Officials declare a No Pack situation. No penalty.

**Rationale:** The destruction of the Pack occurred as a result of normal gameplay. It should not be considered an illegal Pack destruction.

**Keep in Mind:** Taking or giving assists are considered parts of normal gameplay. If the White Jammer instead pushed White Pivot out of bounds or to the ground, White Jammer should be penalized instead. This action is considered a deliberate destruction of the Pack, and the White Jammer should be issued a penalty for Unsporting Conduct (Misconduct).