> [!info] Rules
> [[4.2.4. Other Illegal Procedures]]

> **Skaters who violate the rules of the game should be penalized if the violation has a significant impact on the game.**

### Scenario C4.2.4.A

White Captain is not visibly wearing a “C”. They signal for a Team Timeout to be called.

**Outcome:** Officials grant the Team Timeout. White Captain is penalized.

**Rationale:** Despite not visibly wearing an “C”, the Captain retains the privilege of calling a Team Timeout. Officials should grant this request if they have a Team Timeout remaining; however, exercising a privilege of the Captain while not visibly displaying a “C” warrants a penalty.

**Keep in Mind:** This same principle should also be applied to a Designated Alternate not wearing an “A”. If the Designated Alternate is not a Skater, the penalty is issued to the Captain.

### Scenario C4.2.4.B

White Captain calls an Official Review. Officials grant the request. Red Designated Alternate, while not visibly displaying an “A,” conferences with the Head Referee during the Official Review.

**Outcome:** No penalty.

**Rationale:** Red Designated Alternate’s failure to visibly display an “A” while conferencing for an Official Review does not meaningfully affect the game, nor warrant a penalty.

### Scenario C4.2.4.C

While seated in the Penalty Box, White Blocker removes their mouthguard. They are instructed to stand by a Penalty Box Official and they do so without putting their mouthguard back into their mouth. White Blocker skates to the corner of the Box and is instructed that their penalty is done. They put their mouthguard back into their mouth and return to play.

**Outcome:** No penalty.

**Rationale:** Players are allowed to have their mouthguard out while in the Box, regardless of whether they are standing or sitting.

**Keep in Mind:** If White Blocker leaves the Box without putting their mouthguard back in, even if they put it back in before they return in bounds, this should result in a penalty.

### Scenario C4.2.4.D

Red Jammer arrives at the Penalty Box for a penalty, sits, is told to stand 20 seconds later, and stands. They then watch the scoreboard count down 10 seconds, and leave the Box without being told to do so by an Official.

**Outcome:** Red Jammer should be penalized if they left the Box even a fraction of a second early.

**Rationale:** If Red Jammer’s time had completed and they had not been released, this would be an officiating error and Red Jammer should not be punished for it. However, leaving the Box early without good reason should always be penalized.

**Keep in Mind:** If an Official had told the Red Jammer their time was up, Red Jammer had good reason to leave the Box early.

### Scenario C4.2.4.E

White Blocker is seated in the Penalty Box and asks someone on the bench to toss them their water bottle. A teammate on the bench throws a full bottle of water at White Blocker, who catches it just before it strikes a Penalty Box Official in the face.

**Outcome:** Whoever threw the water bottle should be penalized. If Team Staff threw the bottle, the team’s Captain should be penalized. Officials should warn the White team that throwing things around is dangerous. On a future offense, the thrower of the water bottle should be expelled.

**Rationale:** This action is unsafe and thus inappropriate.

**Keep in Mind:** If the water bottle had hit the Official forcibly and unexpectedly, the thrower should be expelled on the first offense.

### Scenario C4.2.4.F

White Blocker, who is seated in the Penalty Box serving a penalty, is talking with their Captain, who is hovering near the Penalty Box boundary. While communicating, said Captain shifts their weight and one skate rolls over the Penalty Box boundary line and back.

**Outcome:** No penalty.

**Rationale:** While the Captain is not allowed to enter the Box, this entry was brief and the Captain did not enter fully. Partial entry to the Box is not penalized.

**Keep in Mind:** If the Captain (or any unpenalized Skater/Team Staff) fully enters the Box and communicates with a penalized Skater or interferes with normal Penalty Box operation, they should be assessed a penalty.

**Keep in Mind:** If the Captain (or any unpenalized Skater/Team Staff) had passed through the Box, without interacting with their penalized teammate or interrupting the operation of the Box, no penalty should be assessed even if the Captain (or Skater/Team Staff) had fully entered the Box.

### Scenario C4.2.4.G

During the jam, an official notices a mouthguard on the track. No Skater is making an immediate attempt to retrieve the mouthguard.

**Outcome:** The jam is immediately called off. An Illegal Procedure penalty is assessed to the Skater without a mouthguard.

**Rationale:** A mouthguard is required safety equipment for all Skaters. If a skater is completely missing a required piece of safety equipment, unless it is immediately replaced, the jam should be called and the skater penalized.

**Keep in Mind:** If the mouthguard was not removed intentionally, and a Skater immediately retrieves and replaces the mouthguard before the officials call off the jam, play may continue without a penalty. If the mouthguard is not immediately retrieved, officials should call off the jam and issue the penalty.