> [!info] Rules
> [[4.4.2. Penalty Enforcement for Jammers]]


> **A Jammer may have their penalty time shortened if the other Jammer also receives a penalty.**

### Scenario C4.4.2.A

White Jammer receives a penalty, reports to the Penalty Box, and is seated. They serve 25 seconds of their penalty when Red Jammer arrives and sits to serve their own penalty. White Jammer is released, thus consigning Red Jammer to serve 25 seconds. White Jammer returns to the track illegally, and is back in the Box 10 seconds after their prior release to serve their second penalty. Red Jammer leaves the Box.

**Outcome:** Red Jammer is penalized for leaving the Box 15 seconds early. White Jammer owes 30 seconds from the time they are seated.

**Rationale:** To serve the same amount of time “per penalty”, Red Jammer must serve all 25 seconds that White Jammer served initially. In other words, White Jammer sitting for an unrelated penalty does not affect the time that Red Jammer owed.

**Keep in Mind:** Red Jammer owes 45 more seconds: 15 from their first penalty, and 30 from their second penalty.

**Keep in Mind:** Red Jammer’s second penalty could reduce the time White Jammer owes for their own second penalty, but the 15 seconds from Red Jammer’s first penalty cannot be reduced.

### Scenario C4.4.2.B

White Jammer arrives at the Penalty Box immediately behind Red Jammer. Both attempt to be the first one seated, and in so doing, they sit at the exact same moment.

**Outcome:** The Penalty Box Official should inform both Jammers that their time is complete and release them from the Box.

**Rationale:** When sitting simultaneously in the Box, or when arriving between Jams, Jammers cancel each other’s penalties. Both should be immediately released.

**Keep in Mind:** If there is any time differential at all between Jammers sitting, it is not considered to be simultaneous.

**Keep in Mind:** If both Jammers sit between Jams, they are considered to have sat simultaneously and must be released immediately at the beginning of the following Jam.

### Scenario C4.4.2.C

Red Jammer is seated in the Penalty Box and has served 15 seconds when the Jam ends. White Jammer receives a penalty at the Jam-Ending Whistle and reports to the Box between Jams.

**Outcome:** White Jammer reported to the Box between Jams, which will end Red Jammer’s penalty at the start of the next Jam. A Penalty Box Official must instruct Red Jammer to stand and inform them their penalty time is done at the Jam-Starting Whistle. White Jammer must serve 15 seconds.

**Rationale:** Though White Jammer’s penalty ended Red Jammer’s penalty early, Red Jammer must still begin the next Jam from the Box. Penalties are only timed while Jams are active; as such, Jammer swaps only happen while a Jam is ongoing.

### Scenario C4.4.2.D

White Jammer receives a penalty and sits in the Penalty Box for 15 seconds. Red Jammer receives a penalty and arrives at the Box, but before they sit, White Jammer leaves. Red Jammer sits. White Jammer is issued a penalty for leaving early and returns to the Box. White Jammer sits and Red Jammer is released.

**Outcome:** White Jammer is penalized for leaving the Box early. Red Jammer sat in the Box when no other Jammer was serving time. Red Jammer is released upon White Jammer’s return. White Jammer serves the time remaining from their first penalty, plus the amount of time Red Jammer served while seated in the Box.

**Rationale:** A Jammer serving time in the Box is only released by another Jammer being seated in the Box to serve a penalty. Even though White Jammer was penalized first, they were not present when Red Jammer sat. Thus, Red Jammer was the “Jammer serving time in the Box” who was released by the White Jammer “being seated in the Box to serve a penalty.”

**Keep in Mind:** Each penalty is a 30-second segment that may be shortened as long as the Jammers serve equivalent time.