> [!info] Rules
> [[4.4. Enforcing Penalties]]

- [[4.4.1. Penalty Enforcement for Blockers Casebook]]
- [[4.4.2. Penalty Enforcement for Jammers Casebook]]

> **Upon completion of the correct verbal cue and hand signal from an Official, the penalized Skater must immediately leave the track.**

### Scenario C4.4.A

White Pivot arrives at the Penalty Box between Jams. They call to their coach and signal that they are injured. The coach sends a new Skater to the Box. White Pivot gives the new Skater the Stripe and returns to the bench.

**Outcome:** White Pivot’s penalty time is served by the substitute. White Pivot may not skate in the following three Jams.

**Rationale:** Skaters may remove themselves from play when injured. A substitute may serve penalty time for an injured Skater, but the injured Skater may not participate in the next three Jams and the substituting Skater must fill the same position the injured Skater filled.

**Follow-Up:** If White Pivot were not injured but had broken their skate or equipment, and thus could not skate in the upcoming Jam, a substitute would also be allowed. White Pivot would similarly not be allowed to skate during the following three Jams.

### Scenario C4.4.B

Red Jammer is skating at the front of the Pack, close to the inside track boundary, when they are assessed a penalty. Red Jammer takes themself out of bounds to the inside of the track, and pauses to allow the Pack to skate past them. When their path is clear, Red Jammer skates across to the outside of the track, and then continues around toward the Penalty Box.

**Outcome:** No additional penalty.

**Rationale:** After receiving a penalty, Skaters are required to disengage from play and exit the track to the outside when they have a safe and legal opportunity to do so. Red Jammer momentarily entered the infield in order to remove themself from play. At the first safe and legal opportunity, they left the track to the outside. No additional penalty is warranted.

**Keep in Mind:** Skaters remain liable for additional penalties related to safety and must not interfere with Officials performing their duties.

### Scenario C4.4.C

Red Pivot is skating along the straightaway opposite the Pivot and Jammer Lines, close to the inside track boundary. They are assessed a penalty and take themself out of bounds to the inside of the track. Red Pivot then skates across the infield and the straightaway with the Pivot and Jammer Lines to enter the Penalty Box.

**Outcome:** Red Pivot is assessed an additional penalty.

**Rationale:** After receiving a penalty, Skaters are required to exit the track to the outside relative to where that penalty was issued. Red Pivot exits the track to the opposite side of where they were initially penalized.

### Scenario C4.4.D

Red Pivot is assessed a penalty at the end of the straightaway opposite the Pivot and Jammer Lines, just before the turn. They acknowledge the penalty, and skate directly towards the Penalty Box. The path they take toward the Penalty Box results in their exiting the track near the Jammer Line.

**Outcome:** Red Pivot is assessed an additional penalty.

**Rationale:** After receiving a penalty, Skaters are required to exit the track to the outside, relative to where that penalty was issued. Red Pivot exits the track a significant distance from where they were initially penalized.