> [!info] Rules
> [[4.5. Fouling Out and Expulsions]]

> **Expulsions are a way to penalize a Skater or Team Staff who has committed an act that is sufficiently dangerous or unsporting as to remove the individual from the game for that action alone.**

### Scenario C4.5.A

While in bounds and in play, White Blocker initiates an extremely forceful block with a Legal Blocking Zone to a Legal Target Zone on Red Blocker. Red Blocker is knocked airborne, crashes to the track, and remains still until the Jam is called for injury. Red Captain calls an Official Review and requests that White Blocker be expelled for an egregious hit.

**Outcome:** No penalty.

**Rationale:** The rules dictate the manner in which Skaters may block and White Blocker met all those standards. A Skater may not be expelled for legal play.

### Scenario C4.5.B

Red Jammer races to the Penalty Box to serve their penalty. They shout, “I can’t stop!” and crash into the Box. The chairs are knocked backward into a Penalty Box Official. Red Jammer apologizes but complains about how dirty the floor is in front of the Box.

**Outcome:** Red Jammer is expelled.

**Rationale:** Unsafe play in respect to Officials, especially those not wearing safety equipment, is held to a different standard than unsafe play in respect to other Skaters. It is incumbent on the Skater to enter the Box in a safe manner, not on the Official to avoid impact.

**Keep in Mind:** If an Official is unable to avoid the impact because of the constraints of the venue, this still represents unsafe play (due to the constraints of the venue). The Skater must be aware of their track environments, including any limitations of space in the Box. Mitigating environmental factors that aren’t expected to be present, such as water on the track, can be taken into consideration when deciding whether to expel the Skater.

**Keep in Mind:** Skaters are expected to be in control of themselves and their bodies at all times, not just upon entry to the Box. However, opponents, teammates, Team Staff, and Officials in close proximity to the track during active gameplay also bear some responsibility for avoiding contact with Skaters. Contact made to individuals or equipment in areas of active gameplay should only be penalized if the contact is forceful and reasonably avoidable.

### Scenario C4.5.C

Red Blocker receives their seventh penalty and immediately leaves the track. Knowing they have fouled out of the game, they go to their bench, collect their belongings, and exit to the locker room without reporting to the Penalty Box.

**Outcome:** No additional penalties are warranted. Red Blocker’s penalty time starts during the Jam once the Penalty Box Officials are made aware that Red Blocker has fouled out, or when a substitute is seated in the next Jam.

**Rationale:** Once a Skater fouls out, their penalty time starts when they are seated in the Penalty Box; however, by not reporting to the Box to take a seat, that moment never happens. The Penalty Box Officials may be instructed to begin timing once the foul out is confirmed, but if that communication is not possible before the end of the Jam, then the fouled-out Skater’s time begins when a substitute takes their place for the next Jam.

**Keep in Mind:** If the Skater had not fouled out but leaves the Jam for other reasons (such as equipment malfunction or injury), their time does not start until they are seated (or a substitute is seated in their place for the next Jam).